---##ODD PROTOCOL FOR ANTARCTIC MACROALGAE MODEL##---

ELEMENTS OF THE ODD PROTOCOL

#OVERVIEW

1. Purpose and patterns

	The purpose of this model is to study the dynamics of antarctic macroalgae in a general antarctic habitat. 
	We also want to especialize this model to the  case of Potter Cove, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.
	The principal pattern that rules these dynamics is the climate change and its effects on the temporal and spatial scales of: 
	temperature, ice coverage and the sediment load. Abundance and diversity are expected to be inversely proportional to melting disturbances; 
	a decline in ice coverage leads to free substratum for colonization, improving growth; melting process increases the suspended soils concentration and declines
	light incidence, leading to a loss of biomass. 
	In particular, we wanted to answer the question: what is the effect of climate change (temperature rising, reduction in sea ice cover and 
	increment of particulated organic matter/sediment input) on macroalgae biomass?
	
		###Goals

        b. Evaluate the effect of inter-annual variability in ice cover on the primary production/biomass of
            macroalgae.
        c. Study the effect of the decrease in ice cover on the primary production of the
            macroalgae related to the increase in the area available for colonization.
        d. Evaluate the effects of less light due to sediment from melting of the
            glacier as a consequence of global warming.
        e. Evaluate global change scenarios and estimate possible impacts on Antarctic macroalgae

2. Entities, state variables and scales

	The model has two kind of entities: macroalgae and patches representing habitat and its characteristics(availability, hardness, temperature, ice coverage, sediments concentration, light incidence).
	We also implement two breeds of agents: one for annual macroalgae and other for perennial macroalgae
	The environment also has its characteristics: type, size, slope, length, location
	The temporal scale is yearly, and every t in the model will represent the summer season, when biomass data is collected.
	The spatial scale when is real is a defined dimension and when its virtual, 25x25 will be the resolution that we will work on

3. Process overview and scheduling

	The main state variable is biomass, so the processes that have incidence in that state variable are temperature, light, growth rate, mortality and biomass 
	from the previous year (if the agents are from the perennial breed)
	The agents (macroalgae) will have the following behaviour: grow, reproduce and die from grazing, ice breakage or because they completed theire cycle (annuals). 
	The main characteristic of the patches (substratum) will be: availability, hardness, temperature, ice coverage, sediments concentration, light incidence

## 4. Desing concepts


	+Basic principles
	
				B(t + 1) = B(t) + μmax Λ(t) Γ(t) B(t) - D(t) B(t) - M(t)

            B(t) = macroalgae biomass at time t;
            μmax = the maximum intrinsic growth rate;
            Λ(t); Γ(t) = effects of light and temperature on growth (respectively)
			(t); M(t) = biomass-dependent mortality rates associated with herbivory and ice erosion (respectively)

        ** The only assumption that the model has is that nutrients are not limitant and that light, 
		temperature and ice disturbance should be considered as the only environmental variables
		
		**To consider availability of patches we will stablish a limited amount of agents per patch. If there is more agents above that limit,
		the competition effects on light availability and resources has to be considered in a new model.

        ##Hypothesis:

        a. The greater inter-annual variability in ice cover does not produce a significant effect on the
            primary productivity.

        b. In some areas the effect of decreased ice cover has a positive influence on the
            primary production. This change produces an increase in the growth period of the
            macroalgae and in the area available for colonization.

        c. In some areas the effect of global warming produces a lower primary production 
			as the melting of ice causes an increase in suspended sediments
            affecting light availability for macroalgae

        d. The total effect of climate change on the net primary production / biomass of macroalgae
            Antarctic will be positive.
			
		##Prediction:
	
     P1. The macroalgae biomass will increase with climate change due to the newly ice-free areas and changes to an autotrophic 
		 food web and an expansion in the distribution on the macroalgae community
		 
		 P2. The macroalgae biomass will decrease with climate change due to ice scouring and its direct effect on the community and the increase of suspendended
		 sediments in the water column, increasing the turbity. Turbidity can also have and effect on the overlapping the vertical distribution of the macroalgae,
		 producing competition (BUT let's remember that in this model we are not considering the effects of competition over biomass production)
			
	+Emergence:
	
		The most important output of the model will be the change in biomass over time due to the climate change effects
		What happens with the dynamics under different conditions of temperature, ice coverage and sediments concentration. 
	
	+Adaptation: 
	
		The way agents respond to the changes in the environment will be reflected in the biomass produce at t+1. If the conditions of the environment (substratum availability, temperature, etc)
		are beneficial, it it will appear reflected in the biomass at t+1

	+Objectives
	
		The agents don't have an adaptative behaviour
	
	+ Learning
	
		The agents don't have the capacity to learn because they are macroalgae
	
	+ Prediction
		
		In this model agents don't predict future conditions, they can only react to the present one and show the response at t+1

    +Interaction
	
		We will not consider competition between agents in this model. We will stablish a maximun capacity of agents per patch to avoid the effects of competition
		on growth and reproduction

    +Stochasticity
		
		We can introduce stochasticity in this model by including some abnormal years (ticks) in the form of a periodic function.

    +Collectives
		
		There is not collective behaviour in this type of agents
		
    +Observation
	
		The main output of the model is biomass
	
5. Initialization
	
	The initial values of all the state variables: Macroalgae biomass samplings data
	Growth rate obtained bibliographically from previous studies.	
	If we aim to do a general model we can implement a range for temperature in a slider form and fix a starting point for that variable	
	
6. Input data
	
	Data files that are read while the model is executed._

	Enviromental data:
		- Water temperature  
		- Photosynthetically active light (PAR) 
		- Sea icea extention and duration 
		- Meteorological variables, air temperature, winds and precipitation 
		
7. Submodels
	
	Initially, we propose one submodel for every term in the model equation:
				
		Submodel 1 -> Term for starting biomass( biomass from the previous year);  For annual type agents, this term will be zero. 
					      For perennial agents we will consider the biomass at t-1
									
		Submodel 2 -> Term for growth of macroalgae; μmax Λ(t) Γ(t) B(t): The growth will depend on the growth rate, light availability and temperature
				
		Submodel 3 -> Term for mortality of macroalgae; the mortality will depend on grazing, ice scouring or natural death (life cycle completed). 
				
		Submodel 4 -> Model for reproduction and propangle scattering
